README.md, before:

```
 ▄▀▀█▄   ▄▀▀▀▀▄      ▄▀▀▀█▀▀▄ 
▐ ▄▀ ▀▄ █    █      █    █  ▐ 
  █▄▄▄█ ▐    █      ▐   █     
 ▄▀   █     █          █      
█   ▄▀    ▄▀▄▄▄▄▄▄▀  ▄▀       
▐   ▐     █         █         
          ▐         ▐        
```
![Anthropic](https://img.shields.io/badge/Anthropic-black?logo=anthropic&logoColor=white)
![ChatGPT](https://img.shields.io/badge/ChatGPT-74aa9c?logo=openai&logoColor=white)
![Node.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Node.js-339933?logo=nodedotjs&logoColor=white)
![Contributions Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/contributions-welcome-brightgreen)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

# AI Localization Tool
Translates all source strings in a reference (`.js`,`.mjs`,`.json`,`.jsonc`) file to all target languages using AI.

## Features
* Loads source/reference key/value pairs from a file 
* Localizes using AI as needed, writing to a .json file per language
* App-level context can be specified [`appContextMessage`]
* Additional context can be specified per string [`--contextPrefix`, `--contextSuffix`]
* Supports multiple AI providers: Claude, OpenAI [`--provider`]
* User-modifications to output files are safe and will not be overwritten
* Languages are specified using BCP47 tags

## Installation
```bash
npm install -g @drone1/alt
```
## Setup
Create a reference file for your reference data. For example, ``reference.js``:
```javascript
export default {
	'error-msg': `Sorry, we don't know how to do anything`,
	'success-msg': `A massive "achievement"`,
	'_context:success-msg': `This text is for a button when a user completes a task`
}
```
Use whatever filename you prefer, but currently a .js extension is required.
You can specify an exported variable instead of using `default`. See `--referenceVarName`.

2. Running
```bash
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=<secret>
alt translate --reference-file ./reference.js --reference-language en --target-languages aa,bo,es-MX,hi,zh-SG --provider anthropic
```
or
```bash
OPENAI_API_KEY=<secret>
alt translate --reference-file ./reference.js --reference-language en --target-languages aa,bo,es-MX,hi,zh-SG --provider openai
```
These commands would iterate across all key/value pairs in the variable exported from `./reference.js` and if needed, translate.

The examples above would write `aa.json`, `bo.json`, etc., to the current working directory.

Sample output:
```json
{
	"error-msg": "དགོངས་དག་ང་ཚོས་ག་རེ་བྱེད་དགོས་མིན་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མི་འདུག",
	"success-msg": "གྲུབ་འབྲས་\"ཆེན་པོ་\"ཞིག"
}
```

Note that output files can be lower-cased if you pass the ``--normalize-output-filenames`` option, so `fr-FR` translations would write to `fr-fr.json`

## Display language
ALT CLI itself has been localized so you can use it many languages. For non-English languages, you can set the display language with the `ALT_LANGUAGE` environment variable. Please feel free to submit 
an issue or a PR if you'd like to add another language.

## Config file
[_optional_] You can create a config file. By default, `ALT` will search the output directory for `config.json`, but you can specify a path directly using 
`--config-file`. 
Example 
config:

```
{
	"appContextMessage": "This is a description of my app",
	"referenceLanguage": "ar",
	"provider": "anthropic",
	"lookForContextData": true,
	"contextPrefix": "_context:",
	"contextSuffix": "",
	"targetLanguages": [
		"es-MX", "zh-SG"
	]
}
```

Any of the above settings can be specified using command-line arguments (`--app-context-message`, `--reference-language`, `--provider`, `--target-languages`). Command-line arguments take precedence.

## Usage
```
Usage: alt [options] [command]

An AI-powered localization tool

Options:
  -V, --version          output the version number
  -h, --help             display help for command

Commands:
  translate [options]
  list-models [options]
  help [command]         display help for command

Environment variables:
  ANTHROPIC_API_KEY                     Your Anthropic API key
  OPENAI_API_KEY                        Your OpenAI API key
  ALT_LANGUAGE                          POSIX locale used for display

---
Usage: alt translate [options]

Options:
  -r, --reference-file <path>                   Path to reference file of source strings to be translated. This file can be in .js, .mjs, .json, or .jsonc formats and is presumed to be in the reference language specified by --reference-language
  -c, --config-file <path>                      Path to config file; defaults to <output dir>/config.json
  -rl, --reference-language <language>          The reference file's language; overrides any 'referenceLanguage' config setting
  -o, --output-dir <path>                       Output directory for localized files
  -l, --target-languages <list>                 Comma-separated list of language codes; overrides any 'targetLanguages' config setting
  -k, --keys <list>                             Comma-separated list of keys to process
  -R, --reference-exported-var-name <var name>  For .js or .mjs reference files, this will be the exported variable, e.g. for 'export default = {...}' you'd use 'default' here, or 'data' for 'export const data = { ... }'. For .json or .jsonc reference files, this value is ignored. (default: "default")
  -m, --app-context-message <message>           Description of your app to give context. Passed with each translation request; overrides any 'appContextMessage' config setting
  -f, --force                                   Force regeneration of all translations (default: false)
  -rtw, --realtime-writes                       Write updates to disk immediately, rather than on shutdown (default: false)
  -y, --tty                                     Use tty/simple renderer; useful for CI (default: false)
  -M, --model <name>                            LLM model name to use; defaults are: for "anthropic": "claude-3-7-sonnet-20250219", for "openai": "gpt-4-turbo"; use the 'list-models' command to view all models
  -x, --max-retries <integer>                   Maximum retries on failure (default: 3)
  -n, --normalize-output-filenames              Normalizes output filenames (to all lower-case); overrides any 'normalizeOutputFilenames' in config setting (default: false)
  -N, --no-logo                                 Suppress logo printout
  -cp, --context-prefix <value>                 String to be prefixed to all keys to search for additional context, which are passed along to the AI for context
  -cs, --context-suffix <value>                 String to be suffixed to all keys to search for additional context, which are passed along to the AI for context
  -L, --look-for-context-data                   If specified, ALT will pass any context data specified in the reference file to the AI provider for translation. At least one of --contextPrefix or --contextSuffix must be specified (default: false)
  -v, --verbose                                 Enables verbose spew (default: false)
  -d, --debug                                   Enables debug spew (default: false)
  -t, --trace                                   Enables trace spew (default: false)
  --dev                                         Enable dev mode, which prints stack traces with errors (default: false)
  -p, --provider <name>                         AI provider to use for translations (anthropic, openai); overrides any 'provider' config setting
  -h, --help                                    display help for command

---
Usage: alt list-models [options]

Options:
  -p, --provider <name>  AI provider to use for translations (anthropic,
                         openai); overrides any 'provider' config setting
  -h, --help             display help for command
``` 

## Examples
### Example I
* Import from ``loc.js``
* Look for exported variable ``data``
* Translate with Claude
* Look for context keys starting with `_context:`
* Write output files to the current working directory
```bash
alt translate --reference-file loc.js
  --reference-var-name data
  --provider anthropic
  --look-for-context-data
  --context-prefix _context:
```

### Example II
* Import config from `./localization-config.json`
* Import from ``loc.js``
* Look for exported ``default`` value
* Translate with ChatGPT
* Look for context keys ending with `[context]`
* Write to disk repeatedly, as changes are processed
* Write files to `./localization`
```bash
alt translate --config-file ./localization-config.json
  --reference-file loc.js
  --output-dir localization
  --provider openai
  --look-for-context-data
  --context-suffix "[context]"
```
### Example III
* Overrides any config's languages
* Only process the specified strings
```bash
alt translate --config-file config.json
  --reference-file reference.js
  --output-dir localization
  --provider openai
  --look-for-context-data
  --context-suffix "[context]"
  --target-languages vi,aa
  --keys error-msg,title-hero,button-text-send
```
### Example: ALT's localized display strings
See `/localization`, which contains a `config.js` file and localization files used for the tool's own display strings.

Generated with `npm run localize-display-strings`

## Formatting
If your reference values include formatting information like this:
```javascript
"error-msg": "The server returned an error: %%details%%"
```
or
```javascript
"error-msg": "The server returned an error: {{details}}"
```
...or whatever syntax your app may use, I've found the AI's consistently smart enough not to translate `%%details%%` or `{{details}}` into the target language, and will leave it untouched.

Internally, there is currently nothing in the prompt about this. I've tested with `%%var%%` syntax, and it hasn't failed yet.

Please submit an issue if it causes you any trouble.

## Rules
Translation will occur for a given target language & key if any of the following are true:
* The reference value was modified and translation has not yet occurred for the given language/key
* If a context value for the given target language/key is found and has been modified.
* The `--force` flag is used

Translation will _not_ occur if `alt` detects that the given value in the target language file has been manually modified. If you modify an output value manually and want it to be re-translated
later, you can just delete that key/value pair from the given file.

## Additional notes
### Delayed vs. realtime writes
By default, `alt` will not write to disk until the tool is shutting down (including SIGTERM &ndash; yes, `Ctrl+C` is safe).

This behavior is useful if your application is monitoring the output directory and you don't want your server 
constantly restarting, for example.

If you prefer to write updates to disk in real-time (anytime any output data changes, due to translation, etc), you can pass `--realtime-writes`.

### CI
You may want to use `--tty` for more useful output.

## Issues
Feel free to fix existing issues and submit a PR, or submit a new issue.

Commit message:

docs: preferred languages as issues

README.md, after:

```
 ▄▀▀█▄   ▄▀▀▀▀▄      ▄▀▀▀█▀▀▄ 
▐ ▄▀ ▀▄ █    █      █    █  ▐ 
  █▄▄▄█ ▐    █      ▐   █     
 ▄▀   █     █          █      
█   ▄▀    ▄▀▄▄▄▄▄▄▀  ▄▀       
▐   ▐     █         █         
          ▐         ▐        
```
![Anthropic](https://img.shields.io/badge/Anthropic-black?logo=anthropic&logoColor=white)
![ChatGPT](https://img.shields.io/badge/ChatGPT-74aa9c?logo=openai&logoColor=white)
![Node.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Node.js-339933?logo=nodedotjs&logoColor=white)
![Contributions Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/contributions-welcome-brightgreen)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

# AI Localization Tool
Translates all source strings in a reference (`.js`,`.mjs`,`.json`,`.jsonc`) file to all target languages using AI.

## Features
* Loads source/reference key/value pairs from a file 
* Localizes using AI as needed, writing to a .json file per language
* App-level context can be specified [`appContextMessage`]
* Additional context can be specified per string [`--contextPrefix`, `--contextSuffix`]
* Supports multiple AI providers: Claude, OpenAI [`--provider`]
* User-modifications to output files are safe and will not be overwritten
* Languages are specified using BCP47 tags

## Installation
```bash
npm install -g @drone1/alt
```
## Setup
Create a reference file for your reference data. For example, ``reference.js``:
```javascript
export default {
	'error-msg': `Sorry, we don't know how to do anything`,
	'success-msg': `A massive "achievement"`,
	'_context:success-msg': `This text is for a button when a user completes a task`
}
```
Use whatever filename you prefer, but currently a .js extension is required.
You can specify an exported variable instead of using `default`. See `--referenceVarName`.

2. Running
```bash
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=<secret>
alt translate --reference-file ./reference.js --reference-language en --target-languages aa,bo,es-MX,hi,zh-SG --provider anthropic
```
or
```bash
OPENAI_API_KEY=<secret>
alt translate --reference-file ./reference.js --reference-language en --target-languages aa,bo,es-MX,hi,zh-SG --provider openai
```
These commands would iterate across all key/value pairs in the variable exported from `./reference.js` and if needed, translate.

The examples above would write `aa.json`, `bo.json`, etc., to the current working directory.

Sample output:
```json
{
	"error-msg": "དགོངས་དག་ང་ཚོས་ག་རེ་བྱེད་དགོས་མིན་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མི་འདུག",
	"success-msg": "གྲུབ་འབྲས་\"ཆེན་པོ་\"ཞིག"
}
```

Note that output files can be lower-cased if you pass the ``--normalize-output-filenames`` option, so `fr-FR` translations would write to `fr-fr.json`

## Display language
ALT CLI itself has been localized so you can use it many languages. For non-English languages, you can set the display language with the `ALT_LANGUAGE` environment variable. Please feel free to submit 
an issue if you do not see your preferred language.

## Config file
[_optional_] You can create a config file. By default, `ALT` will search the output directory for `config.json`, but you can specify a path directly using 
`--config-file`. 
Example 
config:

```
{
	"appContextMessage": "This is a description of my app",
	"referenceLanguage": "ar",
	"provider": "anthropic",
	"lookForContextData": true,
	"contextPrefix": "_context:",
	"contextSuffix": "",
	"targetLanguages": [
		"es-MX", "zh-SG"
	]
}
```

Any of the above settings can be specified using command-line arguments (`--app-context-message`, `--reference-language`, `--provider`, `--target-languages`). Command-line arguments take precedence.

## Usage
```
Usage: alt [options] [command]

An AI-powered localization tool

Options:
  -V, --version          output the version number
  -h, --help             display help for command

Commands:
  translate [options]
  list-models [options]
  help [command]         display help for command

Environment variables:
  ANTHROPIC_API_KEY                     Your Anthropic API key
  OPENAI_API_KEY                        Your OpenAI API key
  ALT_LANGUAGE                          POSIX locale used for display

---
Usage: alt translate [options]

Options:
  -r, --reference-file <path>                   Path to reference file of source strings to be translated. This file can be in .js, .mjs, .json, or .jsonc formats and is presumed to be in the reference language specified by --reference-language
  -c, --config-file <path>                      Path to config file; defaults to <output dir>/config.json
  -rl, --reference-language <language>          The reference file's language; overrides any 'referenceLanguage' config setting
  -o, --output-dir <path>                       Output directory for localized files
  -l, --target-languages <list>                 Comma-separated list of language codes; overrides any 'targetLanguages' config setting
  -k, --keys <list>                             Comma-separated list of keys to process
  -R, --reference-exported-var-name <var name>  For .js or .mjs reference files, this will be the exported variable, e.g. for 'export default = {...}' you'd use 'default' here, or 'data' for 'export const data = { ... }'. For .json or .jsonc reference files, this value is ignored. (default: "default")
  -m, --app-context-message <message>           Description of your app to give context. Passed with each translation request; overrides any 'appContextMessage' config setting
  -f, --force                                   Force regeneration of all translations (default: false)
  -rtw, --realtime-writes                       Write updates to disk immediately, rather than on shutdown (default: false)
  -y, --tty                                     Use tty/simple renderer; useful for CI (default: false)
  -M, --model <name>                            LLM model name to use; defaults are: for "anthropic": "claude-3-7-sonnet-20250219", for "openai": "gpt-4-turbo"; use the 'list-models' command to view all models
  -x, --max-retries <integer>                   Maximum retries on failure (default: 3)
  -n, --normalize-output-filenames              Normalizes output filenames (to all lower-case); overrides any 'normalizeOutputFilenames' in config setting (default: false)
  -N, --no-logo                                 Suppress logo printout
  -cp, --context-prefix <value>                 String to be prefixed to all keys to search for additional context, which are passed along to the AI for context
  -cs, --context-suffix <value>                 String to be suffixed to all keys to search for additional context, which are passed along to the AI for context
  -L, --look-for-context-data                   If specified, ALT will pass any context data specified in the reference file to the AI provider for translation. At least one of --contextPrefix or --contextSuffix must be specified (default: false)
  -v, --verbose                                 Enables verbose spew (default: false)
  -d, --debug                                   Enables debug spew (default: false)
  -t, --trace                                   Enables trace spew (default: false)
  --dev                                         Enable dev mode, which prints stack traces with errors (default: false)
  -p, --provider <name>                         AI provider to use for translations (anthropic, openai); overrides any 'provider' config setting
  -h, --help                                    display help for command

---
Usage: alt list-models [options]

Options:
  -p, --provider <name>  AI provider to use for translations (anthropic,
                         openai); overrides any 'provider' config setting
  -h, --help             display help for command
``` 

## Examples
### Example I
* Import from ``loc.js``
* Look for exported variable ``data``
* Translate with Claude
* Look for context keys starting with `_context:`
* Write output files to the current working directory
```bash
alt translate --reference-file loc.js
  --reference-var-name data
  --provider anthropic
  --look-for-context-data
  --context-prefix _context:
```

### Example II
* Import config from `./localization-config.json`
* Import from ``loc.js``
* Look for exported ``default`` value
* Translate with ChatGPT
* Look for context keys ending with `[context]`
* Write to disk repeatedly, as changes are processed
* Write files to `./localization`
```bash
alt translate --config-file ./localization-config.json
  --reference-file loc.js
  --output-dir localization
  --provider openai
  --look-for-context-data
  --context-suffix "[context]"
```
### Example III
* Overrides any config's languages
* Only process the specified strings
```bash
alt translate --config-file config.json
  --reference-file reference.js
  --output-dir localization
  --provider openai
  --look-for-context-data
  --context-suffix "[context]"
  --target-languages vi,aa
  --keys error-msg,title-hero,button-text-send
```
### Example: ALT's localized display strings
See `/localization`, which contains a `config.js` file and localization files used for the tool's own display strings.

Generated with `npm run localize-display-strings`

## Formatting
If your reference values include formatting information like this:
```javascript
"error-msg": "The server returned an error: %%details%%"
```
or
```javascript
"error-msg": "The server returned an error: {{details}}"
```
...or whatever syntax your app may use, I've found the AI's consistently smart enough not to translate `%%details%%` or `{{details}}` into the target language, and will leave it untouched.

Internally, there is currently nothing in the prompt about this. I've tested with `%%var%%` syntax, and it hasn't failed yet.

Please submit an issue if it causes you any trouble.

## Rules
Translation will occur for a given target language & key if any of the following are true:
* The reference value was modified and translation has not yet occurred for the given language/key
* If a context value for the given target language/key is found and has been modified.
* The `--force` flag is used

Translation will _not_ occur if `alt` detects that the given value in the target language file has been manually modified. If you modify an output value manually and want it to be re-translated
later, you can just delete that key/value pair from the given file.

## Additional notes
### Delayed vs. realtime writes
By default, `alt` will not write to disk until the tool is shutting down (including SIGTERM &ndash; yes, `Ctrl+C` is safe).

This behavior is useful if your application is monitoring the output directory and you don't want your server 
constantly restarting, for example.

If you prefer to write updates to disk in real-time (anytime any output data changes, due to translation, etc), you can pass `--realtime-writes`.

### CI
You may want to use `--tty` for more useful output.

## Issues
Feel free to fix existing issues and submit a PR, or submit a new issue.
